docs: Follow Up on Design Documentation and Plugin Javadoc (#3251)
hiero-ledger/hiero-block-node: docs/design/block-stream-forward-compatibility.md

Author: This design doc is created based on the description of #3195.

as a **contract** and follows the rule rather than inventing its own.

### The hashing step

This is the stage of verification that reads the items of a block, places each
one into its category, and produces the block root hash. It is the only place
that needs to know the category of an item, so it is also the only place that
applies the forward compatibility rule.

### The five categories and the block root hash

Five categories are hashed today: `consensus headers`, `inputs`, `outputs`,
`state changes`, and `trace data`. Their subtree roots, together with a few block
level values (the previous block's hash, the running root of all prior blocks,
the start of block state root, and the block timestamp), are combined into the
block root hash. The shape of this combination is **fixed**. There are exactly
five category leaves, so a category that does not yet have a leaf cannot be folded
into the hash without changing the tree.

## Design

### The structure of the block stream

Each item in the block stream **SHALL** be self-contained and independent, with
the following constraints applicable to the *unfiltered* stream:

- A block **SHALL** start with a `header`.

> - A block **SHALL** end with a `state_proof`.

Author: Is this correct? Based on #3195 description. Do we mean `block_proof` here?

Reviewer: This should say `block_proof`; not sure why it says `state_proof`; there might be an error in the proto "javadoc" style comments.

Author: Yeah, this is taken from the description of the issue, but made no sense to me. Will update.

Reviewer: Description was copied direct from CN proto comments, so there's probably an error in that comment.

Reading the format version from the block header is one example, and letting a
filtered or redacted item state its own target subtree is another. That handling
stays as it is.

**None of this changes.** The point of the design is only what happens for item
types that do not exist yet.

### The Numbering Rule for Future Item Types

To maximize forward compatibility, and to minimize the need to coordinate
deployments of different systems creating and processing block streams in the
future, the block stream format requires the following rule for field numbering.
Fields numbered **20 and above** MUST be numbered so that:

```text
category = N modulo 20        (N is the actual field number)
```

The resulting category number means:

| Category (N mod 20) |                       Meaning                        | Forward compatible? |
|---------------------|------------------------------------------------------|---------------------|
| 0                   | Not hashed (not part of the block proof merkle tree) | Yes                 |
| 1                   | Requires specific handling                           | No                  |

> | 2                   | Requires specific handling                           | No                  |

Reviewer: This is partially forward-compatible in that it clearly expresses a field that is not compatible if the field schema is not separately known.

Author: Updated.

| 4                   | `inputs`                                             | Yes                 |
| 5                   | `outputs`                                            | Yes                 |
| 6                   | `state changes`                                      | Yes                 |
| 7                   | `trace data`                                         | Yes                 |
| 8                   | Extension 0                                          | Not yet             |
| 9                   | Extension 1                                          | Not yet             |
| 10                  | Extension 2                                          | Not yet             |
| 11                  | Extension 3                                          | Not yet             |
| 12                  | Extension 4                                          | Not yet             |
| 13                  | Extension 5                                          | Not yet             |
| 14                  | Extension 6                                          | Not yet             |

> | 15                  | Extension 7                                          | Not yet             |

Reviewer: These are all forward compatible, these "extension" subtrees are already defined, with the names given here.

Author: Updated. The reason I've put "not yet" is because the code does not support it yet. But this is a design doc, so should not reflect (at the most just note) the current state of the code. Hence also the mention of rejection if we see these.

| 16 to 18            | Reserved for future use                              | No                  |
| 19                  | Not hashed (not part of the block proof merkle tree) | Yes                 |

Reading the table by kind:

- **Categories 0 and 19** are not hashed. A future item here is read and ignored,
  and it contributes nothing to the block hash. Also *fully forward compatible*.
- **Categories 1 and 2** are for items that need specific handling that the rule
  alone cannot express. These are *not forward compatible* and require an update.
- **Categories 3 to 7** are the five subtrees that already exist. A future item
  here is hashed into that subtree exactly like any other item, with no code
  change. This is *full forward compatibility*.
- **Categories 8 to 15** are `extension categories`, reserved for subtrees that do
  not exist yet. The category is known, but there is nowhere to fold the item into
  the block root hash. See

>   [Where forward compatibility ends](#where-forward-compatibility-ends).

Reviewer: These subtrees do exist.

Author: Updated.

so they are additions and the rule applies:

- `BlockTrailer` is field `39`. `39 modulo 20 = 19`, so it is **not hashed** and
  is safely ignored.
- `ConsensusTransform` is field `23`. `23 modulo 20 = 3`, so it is a
  **`consensus headers`** item and is hashed into that subtree.
- `BridgeTransform` is field `27`. `27 modulo 20 = 7`, so it is a
  **`trace data`** item and is hashed into that subtree.

A Block Node built before any of these existed hashes the first block that
contains them correctly, with no code change, because each one lands in a category
that already has a place in the hash tree (or is explicitly not hashed).

### Where Forward Compatibility Ends

Forward compatibility is complete for categories 3 to 7 (the existing subtrees)
and for categories 0 and 19 (not hashed). It **cannot** be complete for
`extension categories` (8 to 15). The block root hash is built from a fixed set of
category leaves, so a subtree that has not been added yet has no leaf, and an item
in an extension category cannot be added to the hash without an upgrade that adds
the subtree and extends the tree. The same is true for the "requires specific

> handling" categories (1 and 2) and the reserved categories (16 to 18).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Forward compatibility is complete for categories 3 to 15 (the defined subtrees)
and for categories 0 and 19 (not hashed). It **cannot** be complete for
`reserved categories` (16 to 18). The block root hash is built from a fixed set of
category leaves that cannot ever be extended, so an item
in a reserved category cannot be added to the hash without an upgrade that defines the correct subtree.
The "requires specific handling" categories (1 and 2) have defined subtrees for each specific field,
but may also require specific preprocessing or other handling, so while compatibility
is version-dependent, the exact processing needed is always either known or the
block cannot be processed. There is never ambiguity for categories 1 and 2.
```

Author: Updated.

When a Block Node meets an item in one of these categories, it has to **refuse the
block** rather than drop the item or place it somewhere plausible. Either shortcut
would let two nodes compute *different hashes for the same block*, which is the
exact problem verification exists to prevent. Refusing the block is safe, and it
also makes the situation obvious, because it shows that the block stream has moved
ahead of this node and an upgrade is needed.

## Diagram

How today's item types feed the subtrees, and how the subtrees form the block
root hash:

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    subgraph Items["Block items"]
        EH[event_header]
        RH[round_header]
        ST[signed_transaction]
        BH[block_header]
        TR[transaction_result]
        TO[transaction_output]
        RF[record_file]
        SC[state_changes]
        TDATA[trace_data]
        BF[block_footer]
        BP[block_proof]
    end
    subgraph Subtrees["Category subtrees"]
        CHT[Consensus headers subtree]
        INT[Inputs subtree]
        OUTT[Outputs subtree]
        SCT[State changes subtree]

>         TDT[Trace data subtree]

Reviewer: This is missing the 8 subtrees on the "right side" of the merkle mountain top tree.

Author: Added.

    end
    EH --> CHT
    RH --> CHT
    ST --> INT
    BH --> OUTT
    TR --> OUTT
    TO --> OUTT
    RF --> OUTT
    SC --> SCT
    TDATA --> TDT
    CHT --> R[Block Root Hash]
    INT --> R
    OUTT --> R
    SCT --> R
    TDT --> R
    BF -. "not hashed, carries three root tree leaves" .-> R
    BP -. "not hashed, proves the root hash" .-> R
```

How a single block item is placed:

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A[Block item received] --> B{Is this a known item type?}
    B -- yes --> C["Use its established category (from the table above)"]
    B -- no --> D["category = field number modulo 20"]
    D --> E{Which category?}
    E -- "3 to 7: existing subtree" --> F["Hash into that subtree, fully forward compatible"]
    E -- "0 or 19: not hashed" --> G["Read and ignore, fully forward compatible"]

>     E -- "8 to 15: extension" --> H["Refuse the block, upgrade required"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    E -- "8 to 15: extension" --> H["Include the item in the correct extension subtree"]
```

Author: Updated.

  (0 or 19) is handled normally and is not a failure.
- A future item that maps to an `extension category` (8 to 15), a "requires
  specific handling" category (1 or 2), or a reserved category (16 to 18) causes
  the block to be refused, with a clear failure showing that an upgrade is
  required. It is never silently dropped or placed elsewhere.
- A malformed or unexpected item that does not fit the rule at all is treated as a
  **parse failure**, as it is today.

## Acceptance Tests

1. **No regression.** Every item type that exists today is placed in the same
   category and produces the same block root hash as before this change.
2. **New item, existing category.** A block containing a simulated future item
   whose `field number modulo 20` is 3 to 7 hashes to the same value a node would
   produce if it had always known that item type.
3. **New item, not hashed.** A block containing a simulated future item whose
   `field number modulo 20` is 0 or 19 verifies successfully, with the item left
   out of every category.
4. **Extension category refused.** A block containing a simulated future item
   whose `field number modulo 20` is 8 to 15 (or 1, 2, or 16 to 18) is refused

>    with the designated failure. It is never accepted and never silently dropped.

Reviewer: This needs to be corrected for proper handling of subtrees 8-15.

Author: Updated.
